The Project Gutenberg eBook of The “Ideal” Cookery Book Third
Edition, by Lilian Clarke

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The “Ideal” Cookery Book Third Edition
       A reliable guide to home cooking

Author: Lilian Clarke

Release Date: January 25, 2023 [eBook #69876]

Language: English

Produced by: David E. Brown and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
             at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE “IDEAL” COOKERY BOOK
THIRD EDITION ***





  The
  “Ideal”
  Cookery
  Book          _THIRD EDITION._

  A Reliable Guide to Home Cooking

  _Containing 246 Useful and Dainty Recipes_

  BY
  LILIAN CLARKE

  BRUMBY & CLARKE, LIMITED, HULL
  AND 5, FARRINGDON AVENUE, LONDON, E.C.




PREFACE.


Of the making of Cookery Books, we are told, there is no end, but the
comparative worthlessness of their contents for practical domestic
purposes is no doubt the reason why there is still as great a demand as
ever for a thoroughly reliable and up-to-date volume.

The little book I now offer to the public, claims to be the _best,
cheapest, and most useful_ Culinary Handbook yet produced, and I
venture to think its contents will fully justify this assertion.

A large proportion of the recipes are my _own compilation_, and all
alike have been _carefully revised and repeatedly tested_.

Every recipe has been arranged with a view to _practical usefulness_,
and may be confidently recommended for _ease of preparation_,
_daintiness_, and _economy_.

Those who once use the “IDEAL COOKERY BOOK,” will afterwards use no
other, not because their years have been shortened by bad cooking and
unwholesome food, but because they recognise in it all the qualities it
claims to possess, and are able by its aid to _realize in the home the
true “Ideal” of the Culinary Art_.

                                                             THE AUTHOR.




CONTENTS.


  I. Savouries.
                                               PAGE

   1. Forcemeat                                  13
   2. Mince Meat                                 13
   3. Potato Balls                               13
   4. Tasty Dish of Cold Cooked Beef             14
   5. Savoury Puffs                              14
   6. Breakfast Dish                             14
   7. Potato Cakes                               14
   8. Veal Mould                                 15
   9. Timbales of Mutton                         15
  10. Rolled Steak with Potatoes                 16
  11. Salad Dressing                             16
  12. Cabbage Balls                              16
  13. Cheese Croquettes                          16
  14. Potato Ribbons                             17
  15. Rissoles à Lilian                          17
  16. Fish Cakes                                 17
  17. Savoury Omelette                           18
  18. Dough Nuts                                 18
  19. Cheese Straws                              18
  20. Egg and Bacon Pie                          19
  21. Another Cold Meat Dish                     19
  22. Scrambled Eggs                             19
  23. Meat Roll                                  19
  24. Pommes de Terre à la Reine                 20
  25. Dormers                                    20
  26. Beef or Veal Mould                         20
  27. Gravy for Mutton                           21
  28. Gravy for Beef                             21
  29. Beefsteak Pie                              21
  30. Tasty Dish of Beefsteak                    22
  31. Cold Meat Pâtés                            22
  32. Potted Beef                                22
  33. Pommes de terre au Lait                    23
  34. Pommes de terre à L’Écosse                 23
  35. Potato Croquettes                          23
  36. A dainty way of Cooking an Egg             24
  37. Beef Tea Custard                           24
  38. Beef Tea                                   24
  39. Dainty way of Serving Mashed Potatoes      25
  40. Fried Potatoes                             25
  41. Ragôut of Mutton and Eggs                  25


  II. Pastry.

   1. Short Pastry (_Rich_)                      26
   2. Ground Rice Cheesecakes                    26
   3. Cocoanut Cheesecakes                       26
   4. Macaroons                                  27
   5. Maids of Honour                            27
   6. Lemon Curd                                 27
   7. Welsh Cheesecakes                          27
   8. Milk Rolls                                 28
   9. Almond Cheesecakes                         28
  10. Bakewell Cheesecakes                       28
  11. Pastry Sandwiches                          28
  12. French Tartlets                            29
  13. Apple Cheesecakes                          29
  14. Good Family Pastry                         29
  15. Pie Pastry                                 29


  III. Custards, Puddings, and Blanc Manges.

   1. Lemon Rice Pudding                         30
   2. Sponge Cake Pudding                        30
   3. Strawberry Blanc Mange                     30
   4. Honeycomb                                  31
   5. Lemon Mould                                31
   6. Baroness Pudding                           31
   7. Holderness Pudding                         32
   8. Lemon Pudding                              32
   9. Parson’s Pudding                           32
  10. Queen’s Pudding                            32
  11. Ideal Pudding                              33
  12. Curd Pudding                               33
  13. Chocolate Blanc Mange                      33
  14. Suet Dumplings                             34
  15. Snow Pudding                               34
  16. French Pancakes                            34
  17. German Pancakes                            34
  18. Junket                                     35
  19. Three Minutes Pudding                      35
  20. German Pudding                             35
  21. Rhubarb Mould                              36
  22. Imperial Pudding                           36
  23. Fig Pudding (_No. 1._)                     36
  24. Sultana Pudding                            37
  25. Trieste Pudding                            37
  26. Stewed Figs                                37
  27. Baked Milk (_For Fruit_)                   37
  28. Baked Rhubarb Pudding                      38
  29. Apple Snow                                 38
  30. Prune Mould                                38
  31. Bachelor’s Pudding                         39
  32. Raspberry Sponge                           39
  33. Lemon Cream                                39
  34. Gâteau de Riz                              40
  35. Kingston Puddings                          40
  36. Fig Puddings (_No. 2._)                    40
  37. Cheese Pudding (_No. 1._)                  41
  38. Paragon Pudding                            41
  39. Cambridge Pudding                          41
  40. Sago Kelley                                42
  41. Orange Meringue                            42
  42. Spanish Custard                            42
  43. Cheese Pudding (_No. 2._)                  43
  44. Apple Trifle                               43
  45. Economic Custard                           43
  46. Tasmanian Pudding                          43
  47. Yorkshire Pudding                          44
  48. Steamed Batter Pudding                     44
  49. Chocolate Pudding                          44
  50. Gêlée à la Normandie                       45
  51. Chocolate Blanc Mange                      45
  52. Eastbourne Pudding                         45
  53. Summerville Plum Pudding                   45
  54. Victoria Pudding                           46
  55. Prune Gâteau                               46
  56. Raspberry Pudding                          46
  57. Rice Pudding                               47
  58. Small Sago Pudding                         47
  59. Ground Rice Pudding                        47
  60. Custard Pudding                            48
  61. Stewed Pears                               48
  62. Harrogate Pudding                          48


  IV. Sauces.

   1. Apple Sauce                                49
   2. Bread Sauce                                49
   3. Melted Butter                              49
   4. Egg Sauce                                  50
   5. White Sauce                                50
   6. Mint Sauce                                 50
   7. Onion Sauce                                50


  V. Cakes.

   1. Madeira Cake                               51
   2. Beverleigh Buns                            52
   3. Queen Cakes                                52
   4. Raspberry Sandwich                         52
   5. Rock Buns                                  52
   6. Cornflour Cake                             53
   7. Oatmeal Buns                               53
   8. Lemon Sandwich Cakes                       53
   9. Yorkshire Parkin                           53
  10. Drummond Cake                              54
  11. Gingerbread                                54
  12. Ginger Nuts                                54
  13. Victoria Roll                              55
  14. Yorkshire Cake                             55
  15. Sally Lunn Teacakes (_No. 1._)             55
  16. Summerville Cakes                          55
  17. Soda Cake                                  56
  18. Brunswick Cakes                            56
  19. Jordan Cakes                               56
  20. Lunch Cake                                 56
  21. Plain Plum Cake                            57
  22. Rice Buns                                  57
  23. Raspberry Buns                             57
  24. Walnut Cake                                58
  25. Icing for Walnut Cake                      58
  26. Cocoanut Pyramids                          58
  27. London Buns                                58
  28. Victoria Buns                              59
  29. Norwegian Cake                             59
  30. Sultana Cake                               59
  31. Cocoanut Cake                              59
  32. Lancashire Parkin                          60
  33. Delicious Cake                             60
  34. Chocolate Cake                             60
  35. Rich Plum Cake                             61
  36. Plain Seed or Currant Loaf                 61
  37. Malta Cake                                 61
  38. Small Rice Cake                            62
  39. Parisian Sandwich                          62
  40. Sultana Scones                             62
  41. York Teacakes                              63
  42. Fairy Cakes                                63
  43. Orange Rock Cakes                          63
  44. Jersey Cake                                63
  45. Seed Bread (_To Butter_)                   64
  46. Queen Anne’s Cake                          64
  47. Spice Bread                                64
  48. Bachelor’s Buttons                         65
  49. Cocoanut Fingers                           65
  50. Victorine Buns                             65
  51. Orange Cakes                               66
  52. Ginger Cakes                               66
  53. Cherry Cakes                               66
  54. Small Seed Cakes                           67
  55. Demon Jumbles                              67
  56. Cocoanut Gingerbread                       67
  57. Lemon Buns                                 68
  58. Ashton Sandwiches                          68
  59. Christmas or Wedding Cake                  68
  60. Split Cakes                                69
  61. Baking Powder Rolls                        69
  62. American Cake                              70
  63. Shrewsbury Cakes                           70
  64. Swiss Roll                                 71
  65. Westwood Buns                              71
  66. Sally Lunn Teacakes (_No. 2._)             71
  67. Queen Cakes (_No. 2._)                     72
  68. Neapolitan Ribbon Cake                     72
  69. Clancarthy Buns                            73
  70. Spice Bread                                73
  71. Swiss Cakes (_Another Method_)             73
  72. Genoa Cake                                 74
  73. Fairy Baskets                              74
  74. Fancy Bread (_Without Yeast_)              75


  VI. Biscuits.

   1. Picnic Biscuits                            76
   2. Rice Biscuits                              76
   3. Shrewsbury Biscuits                        76
   4. Ginger Drops                               77
   5. Seventy Little Biscuits for 2d.            77
   6. Ginger Biscuits                            77
   7. Rice Biscuits                              77
   8. Seed Biscuits                              78
   9. Soda Biscuits                              78
  10. Sweet Biscuits                             78
  11. Chestnut Biscuits                          78
  12. Cocoanut Biscuits                          79
  13. Four pounds of Biscuits for 8d.            79
  14. Chocolate Biscuits                         79
  15. Cinnamon Stars                             79
  16. Ratafias                                   80
  17. Almond Rings                               80
  18. Cheese Straws                              80
  19. Patent Barley Biscuits                     80


  VII. Bon Bons.

   1. French Almond Rock                         81
   2. Candy Dough                                81
   3. Candy Cherries                             81
   4. Almond Creams                              82
   5. Walnut Creams                              82
   6. Cream Dates                                82
   7. Brandy Snap (_No. 1._)                     82
   8. Raspberry Rock                             82
   9. Cocoanut Fondant                           83
  10. Chocolate or Coffee Fondant                83
  11. Nougat                                     83
  12. Gelées Françaises                          84
  13. Chestnut Bonbons                           84
  14. Chocolate Baisers                          84
  15. Yorkshire Toffee                           84
  16. Brandy Snap (_No. 2._)                     85
  17. Marmalade                                  85
  18. Patent Groats                              85


  VIII. Beverages.

   1. Apple Wine                                 86
   2. Barley Water                               86
   3. Ginger Beer                                86
   4. Ginger Wine                                87
   5. Lemon Squash                               87
   6. Lemon Water                                87


  IX. Additional Useful Recipes.

   1. To Bottle Green Gooseberries               88
   2. Gooseberry Jelly                           88
   3. Apple Jelly                                88
   4. Cough Mixture                              89
   5. Pork Pie Pastry                            89
   6. Recipe for Keeping Eggs                    89




I. SAVOURIES.


The general rule for roasting or boiling joints is to allow a quarter
of an hour for each pound and half an hour over, unless the meat is
preferred underdone.


1. Forcemeat.

  2-oz. ham.
  ¼-lb. suet
  6-oz. bread crumbs.
  2 eggs.
  Salt and pepper.

Make it into balls or use as stuffing. Bake ½ hour.


2. Mince Meat.

  1¼-lb. raisins.
  ¾-lb. sultanas.
  1-lb. currants.
  ½-lb. suet.
  ¼-lb. peel.
  1-lb. sugar.
  1-lb. apples.
  1-gill of Rum.

Chop the suet very fine, stone the raisins and chop them, chop the
sultanas, peel, and apples, and add the currants. Put in a bowl with
the sugar and rum and mix very thoroughly. Put in jars and tie down.


3. Potato Balls.

Mash the potatoes--season with pepper and salt and little chopped
parsley and bind with yolk of egg. Form into balls, dip in egg and
bread crumbs and fry in boiling fat or in the oven--serve hot.


4. Tasty dish of Cold Cooked Beef.

Butter a pie dish and scatter with bread crumbs and chopped parsley.
Arrange layer of slices of beef with pepper and salt. Next, layer of
crumbs, then beef, placing sippets of bread on the top. Pour gravy
over, and bake 2 hours.


5. Savoury Puffs.

½-lb. potatoes, yolk of 1 egg, 2-oz. flour, pepper, salt, and cold
meat. Mash the potatoes, add yolk of egg and seasoning, blend well
into dry dough, roll ¼ inch thick, cut in rounds and fill with rissole
mixture, fold over and press together. Fry brown and serve.


6. Breakfast Dish.

Boil two eggs twelve minutes and put in cold water. When cool remove
shells, dry with flour, cover each with sausage meat, egg and bread
crumbs, and fry in boiling fat till brown. Cut in halves and serve.


7. Potato Cakes.

  1-lb. mashed potatoes.
  2 yolks of eggs.
  ½-lb. flour.
  Little salt.

Mix flour and potato, bind with yolks, and season. Roll out half inch
thick. Bake in quick oven. Split open and butter. Serve very hot.


8. Veal Mould.

  1-lb. veal.
  ½-lb. fat bacon.
  Little parsley.
  Grated rind of 1 lemon.
  4 eggs.
  1-gill of stock.
  Pepper and salt.

Boil the eggs hard and cut in slices. Chop the parsley and mix it with
the rind and seasonings. Line a plain mould with pieces of egg at the
bottom. Cut up the veal in neat, square pieces, and put in the mould
in alternate layers with cut-up bacon and sliced eggs, sprinkling each
layer with seasoning. When full, pour in the stock. Cover tightly with
buttered paper, putting a plate and weight on the top. Bake in a slow
oven for 4 hours. Turn out when cold.


9. Timbales of Mutton.

  ½-lb. cold minced mutton.
  ¼-lb. finely chopped mushrooms.
  1 teaspoonful chopped parsley.
  Salt and pepper.
  2-oz. bread crumbs.
  ¼-pint gravy.
  2 eggs.
  1 teaspoonful anchovy essence.

Put the meat, crumbs, parsley and seasonings in a basin, mix well and
add beaten eggs. Put into well buttered castle pudding tins, cover with
buttered paper, and steam ½ hour. Turn out and serve with a brown or
tomato sauce. Any cold meat may be used this way.


10. Rolled Steak with Potatoes.

About 2-lbs. (sufficient for five persons) of lean, thick beefsteak.
Cut in thin slices and roll each piece up with the fat in the middle.
Place in a large dish and add pepper and salt. Fill up with cold water
and put in the oven for 2 hours. If the gravy boils away, fill up with
boiling water. Place whole, pared potatoes on the top one hour before
the dinner is wanted. Bake the potatoes brown. Serve in the dish.


11. Salad Dressing.

The yolk of 1 egg, a little mustard and salt, 1 teaspoonful sugar, 1
tablespoonful cream, and a little vinegar.


12. Cabbage Balls.

Mince some cold cabbage finely, mix with an equal part of bread crumbs,
season with pepper and salt, and bind with the beaten egg. Form into
large sized balls, roll in flour, and fry in boiling fat. Drain on
paper, sprinkle with salt, pile in a pyramid, and serve hot, with gravy.


13. Cheese Croquettes.

2-oz. grated cheese, mixed with some cold mashed potatoes, season with
pepper and salt, and add about 2-oz. bread crumbs. Mix with half of a
beaten egg, and form into balls. Dip them in rest of egg, and fry in
boiling fat or bake in a tin with dripping in the oven. Serve hot.


14. Potato Ribbons.

Peel the potatoes, then peel round and round very thinly. Let them lie
in cold water for an hour, drain, place in frying basket, plunge into
hot fat, drain on paper and serve hot.


15. Rissoles à Lilian.

  Cold meat.
  1 egg.
  ½-pint bread crumbs.
  Seasoning and gravy.

Mince the meat finely, and put in a bowl with bread crumbs. Bind with
the egg and a little gravy, but they must be stiff. Put a little of the
mixture in the bottom of a floured teacup and press it down, then turn
out into well-greased dripping tin and bake. Serve hot, with gravy.


16. Fish Cakes.

  ½-lb. cold fish.
  ½ teaspoonful salt.
  Bread crumbs.
  ½-lb. mashed potatoes.
  ¼ teaspoonful pepper.
  2-oz. butter.

Remove bones from fish, mix with the potato, and add the melted butter,
salt, pepper and one and a half beaten eggs. Make into flat round
cakes, brush over with rest of egg and cover with bread crumbs. Fry in
hot fat 4 or 5 minutes. Drain and serve hot.


17. Savoury Omelette.

  1-oz. butter.
  2 eggs.
  Chopped parsley.
  Pepper and salt.

Beat eggs slightly, and add seasoning. When the butter is hot in the
frying-pan, pour in the eggs, stir to prevent sticking, and as soon as
it commences to set, draw towards the handle of the pan, turn over and
cook for a minute. Serve hot.


18. Dough Nuts.

  1-oz. castor sugar.
  ½-lb. flour.
  2-oz. butter.
  1 egg.
  Spice or ginger.
  1-gill milk.
  Pinch of salt.

Rub butter into flour, mix dry ingredients, make into a paste with egg
and milk, roll out, cut with a round cutter, then take the centre out
with a smaller one, fry in hot fat and dredge freely with sugar.


19. Cheese Straws.

  2-oz. butter.
  3-oz. grated cheese.
  1 tablespoonful water.
  Salt.
  2-oz. flour.
  1 yolk of egg.
  Pepper.
  Cayenne.

Mix well, roll into fingers and rings. Bake 7 minutes. When cold put
two or three straws through each ring.


20. Egg & Bacon Pie.

Put a layer of pastry in a soup plate, put small pieces of cooked ham
or bacon in, beat one or more eggs, season with pepper, pour over the
bacon, and cover with pastry and bake.


21. Another Cold Meat Dish.

Make a batter of 3 tablespoonsful of flour, ½-pint of milk, one
egg. Chop the meat, add half a boiled onion, ½ teaspoonful chopped
parsley, and salt. Stir into the batter. Grease a pie dish, stir in the
omelette, and bake ½ hour. Turn out on a dish, and serve with gravy.


22. Scrambled Eggs.

  1 egg.
  1-oz. butter.
  1 tablespoonful milk.
  Pepper and salt.

Put butter in pan, and when melted, add eggs and milk. Stir until it
thickens, and serve on buttered toast. Use more eggs for more than one
person.


23. Meat Roll.

  1-lb. beefsteak or veal (minced raw).
  ¾-lb. minced ham.
  2 eggs.
  6-ozs. bread crumbs.

Mix all well together, and form into a roll, place in a cloth tied at
each end, and steam 2 hours. Serve hot or cold.


24. Pommes de Terre à la Reine.

Take some boiled potatoes and mash them finely. Take any cold meat, and
chop it also finely. Make the meat and potato in little balls, cover
with egg and bread crumbs, and fry in boiling fat. Serve on a d’oyley.
Gravy is an improvement.


25. Dormers.

  ½-lb. cold meat.
  3-ozs. boiled rice.
  Pepper, salt.
  2-ozs. suet.
  1 egg.
  Bread crumbs.
  Gravy.

Chop the meat and suet and rice finely. Mix well together and add
seasoning and egg. Roll in shapes, sprinkle with bread crumbs, and fry
in hot dripping a light brown.


26. Beef or Veal Mould.

  1-lb. beef or veal.
  ½ small packet of gelatine.
  2 eggs.

Put the gelatine to soak in a little cold water. Cut the meat into
small pieces, or put through the mincing machine, and stew till tender
in enough water to cover it. Boil the eggs hard and arrange them in a
mould. Add the gelatine to the liquid, and pour the whole into a mould
and put in a cool place to set. There should not be more liquid than
will fill the mould.


27. Gravy for Mutton.

Pour off nearly all the fat from the joint, and make a thin gravy by
pouring boiling water over the meat. Replace in the oven and boil a few
minutes. Add a little gravy browning if liked, also add pepper and salt.


28. Gravy for Beef.

Pour off nearly all the dripping from the joint. Pour boiling water
over the meat and season with pepper and salt, adding gravy browning
if desired. Mix a little flour and cold water to a smooth paste, and
thicken with boiling water, and add to the gravy, stirring thoroughly
and returning to the oven to boil.


29. Beefsteak Pie.

Take from 1 to 2 lbs. of beefsteak, according to the quantity required,
and cut into small pieces. Place it in a pan with sufficient cold water
to cover. Season with pepper and salt, and stew for 1½ hours. Have
ready a pie dish lined with crust, into which put the stewed steak and
part of the gravy. Put on the cover and bake about ¾ of an hour. Use
the rest of the gravy as required. Make the crust according to “Pie
Pastry” recipe.


30. Tasty Dish of Beefsteak.

Take as much beefsteak as is required and place it in an enamelled pie
dish, cover with cold water and put into the oven to stew, placing an
inverted pie dish on the top. Season with pepper and salt. Add more
boiling water as the other evaporates. Stew for 2½ hours, but a quarter
of an hour before dishing up thicken the gravy with flour and water and
let it boil up.


31. Cold Meat Pâtés.

Take the remains of a joint and mince very finely. Place in a basin,
add a little gravy to moisten, and mix well, seasoning with pepper and
salt.

Have ready some patty pans lined with pie pastry, into which put a
portion of the mince, and cover with a pastry lid. Bake until the
pastry is brown, and serve hot on a d’oyley. Put some good gravy in a
tureen to serve with the pâtés.


32. Potted Beef.

Take 1-lb. of second beefsteak and cut into small pieces, and cover
with cold water and put in a pan and stew gently for about 1½ hours.
Put through the mincing machine twice. Place in a basin and add as
much of the gravy as is necessary to moisten slightly. Mix and beat
thoroughly and put into pots, making the surface very smooth. Melt some
butter and pour a little into each pot. Decorate when cold with a sprig
of parsley.


33. Pommes de terre au Lait.

Cut some cooked potatoes into slices and lay them in a pan of warm
milk. Boil for a few minutes, when the milk will become thick. Add a
little butter, parsley, and nutmeg to the contents of the pan and serve
at once.


34. Pommes de terre à L’Écosse.

Take some large raw potatoes and cut them into square shapes. Blanch
them in salt and water, and then scoop out the centre of each potato
with a spoon. Fill up the holes with finely chopped meat or ham. Lay
the stuffed potatoes in a dripping tin, cover with gravy or water and a
little gravy browning. Bake slowly until tender, pouring the gravy over
them from time to time until they present a glacé appearance.


35. Potato Croquettes.

Take some mashed potatoes and add 2-oz. butter, 2 eggs, and ½ teacup of
flour, and a little grated nutmeg. Mix all well together, and if hot,
let it get cold. Form into fingers, cover with egg and flour, and fry
in boiling fat.


36. A dainty way of Cooking an Egg.

Take a large saucer, and rub it with butter, and set it over a pan of
boiling water. Beat an egg lightly with 1 tablespoonful of milk and a
pinch of pepper and salt. Strain into the saucer, cover it, and leave
for 10 minutes to cook.


37. Beef Tea Custard.

Beat a fresh egg, strain into a gill of beef tea, and add salt to
taste. Turn into a small buttered cup, cover with buttered paper, and
steam 20 minutes. The water should not boil. This can be turned out and
eaten either hot or cold.


38. Beef Tea.

Take 1-lb. of steak, neck, or shin of beef. Cut it into small pieces,
put it into a basin, and cover with cold water, leaving for an hour or
two. Place in a double pan or in any pan that will allow the contents
to gently simmer, and simmer for two or three hours, when it will be
ready for use. Add salt and pepper if desired.


39. Dainty way of Serving Mashed Potatoes.

Steam the potatoes for about half an hour, mash well or put through a
potato sieve. Have ready a basin, the bottom and sides of which have
been greased with lard or butter and sprinkled with bread raspings.
Press the potatoes into the basin and turn out into a tureen.


40. Fried Potatoes.

Peel the potatoes and leave whole, unless very large. Place in a
dripping tin, in which there is a depth of an inch of hot dripping,
and put into a fairly hot oven. As the potatoes brown on the one side,
turn on the other. When cooked, which should be in about half an hour,
strain well and serve in a tureen.


41. Ragôut of Mutton and Eggs.

Mince finely any cold mutton and season with pepper and salt. Place
in a dish in the oven and simmer half an hour. Fry as many eggs as
required, and have ready a hot dish with pieces of toast arranged on
it. Turn the meat on to the dish and place the eggs on the top and
serve.




II. PASTRY.


1. Short Pastry (Rich).

  6-ozs. flour.
  4-ozs. butter.
  1-oz. castor sugar.
  Pinch of salt.
  Yolk of egg.
  Water.

Mix sugar and salt with flour, rub the butter lightly in, add yolk of
egg and enough water to make into a stiff paste. Roll out once, and it
is ready for use.


2. Ground Rice Cheesecakes.

  Breakfast cup of ground rice.
  Ditto of castor sugar.
  1 egg.
  ¼-lb. butter.
  Almond flavouring.

Cream the butter and sugar, add egg, rice, etc. Mix well and use.


3. Cocoanut Cheesecakes.

  2-ozs. cocoanut.
  1½-ozs. castor sugar.
  1 tablespoonful flour.
  1½-ozs. butter.
  1 egg.

Cream the butter and sugar, add egg and flour, and lastly cocoanut. Put
a spoonful of the mixture into patty pans lined with pastry and bake.


4. Macaroons.

  2 eggs (whites).
  Pinch of salt.
  2-oz. castor sugar.
  2-ozs. ground almonds.

Whip the whites to a stiff froth, add sugar and almonds. Fill patty
pans and bake.


5. Maids of Honour.

  ½-lb. castor sugar.
  3 eggs.
  2-oz. butter.
  2 lemons.

Put the butter into a pan, and when melted, stir sugar in, then add
grated rind of one lemon and the juice of two. Add beaten eggs, and
simmer gently till thick. Fill lined patty pans with the mixture and
bake.


6. Lemon Curd.

  1-lb. lump sugar.
  3 eggs.
  ¼-lb. butter.
  2 lemons.

Melt the butter and sugar in a pan, add juice of lemons and beaten eggs
and stir until it is very thick. Put in jars and when cold, tie down.
It will keep for months.


7. Welsh Cheesecakes.

Line tart tins with pastry and fill with mixture made of the weight of
1 egg in butter, sugar and flour and 1 teaspoonful baking powder. Put
a little jam in bottom of tins and then a spoonful of mixture. Bake in
moderate oven.


8. Milk Rolls.

Dissolve ½-oz. yeast in ¾-pint milk. Add pinch of salt and mix to a
smooth dough with flour. Set to rise 2 hours, turn on board and form
into twists, coils, &c. Set to rise again, brush with milk and bake.


9. Almond Cheesecakes.

  4-oz. ground almonds.
  1 egg.
  4-oz. castor sugar.
  2-oz. butter.

Mix well together. Line patty pans and fill with mixture. Place bars of
pastry across and bake.


10. Bakewell Cheesecakes.

  Weight of 1 egg in butter, sugar and flour.
  ½ teaspoonful baking powder.
  1 egg.
  ½ grated lemon.

Line patty pans with pastry, put in each a little jam, then the mixture.


11. Pastry Sandwiches.

Make some short crust with 3-oz. butter and ½-lb. flour. Roll out half
the pastry, spread with jam, cover with the other half and bake. When
cold, ice evenly and dry in a slow oven or near the fire.


12. French Tartlets.

  2 eggs.
  ¼-lb. crushed ratafias.
  2-ozs. castor sugar.

Put a spoonful of mixture in each lined tin, then a spoonful of jam,
then the mixture on the top and bake.


13. Apple Cheesecakes.

  ¼-lb. apple pulp.
  2-ozs. sugar.
  2 yolks.
  2-ozs. butter.
  Rind and juice of ½ lemon.
  1 white of egg.

Melt the butter, and add to the apple with lemon and sugar, and lastly,
beaten yolks and stiff white.


14. Good Family Pastry.

To every pound of flour allow ½-lb. of lard and ½ teaspoonful of salt.
Rub the lard in, and mix to smooth paste with water. Roll out once
altogether, and then use as required. Bake in a quick oven. Add 1-oz.
more lard to make extra good.


15. Pie Pastry.

To every pound of flour, allow 3-ozs. of lard, 3-ozs. of dripping, 3
teaspoonsful baking powder, and half a teaspoonful salt. Mix to a stiff
dough with cold water and use as required.




III. CUSTARDS, PUDDINGS, & BLANC MANGES.


1. Lemon Rice Pudding.

Boil a cup of rice until soft, put in dish and add grated rind of 1
lemon, yolks of 2 eggs, little more than 1 pint of milk and a pinch of
salt.

Bake 1 hour. Beat to froth the whites of eggs with 1 cup of powdered
sugar and the juice of 1 lemon. Spread over pudding when cold and put
in the oven to brown.


2. Sponge Cake Pudding.

Split some sponge cakes into slices and spread with jam and place in
a pie dish. Beat 2 eggs and 1 dessertspoonful of sugar together, add
½-pint milk, a little nutmeg, and stir. Pour the custard over the cakes
in the dish. Bake in a slow oven till set--about ½ hour.


3. Strawberry Blanc Mange.

  2 tablespoonsful cornflour.
  1 leaf of strawberries.
  1½-pints milk.
  2 tablespoonsful sugar.

Mix the cornflour with a little milk then add the rest and boil till
stiff. Add sugar and pour into mould and push strawberries down here
and there.


4. Honeycomb.

  3 teacups milk.
  3 eggs.
  1 small teacup sugar.
  ½-oz. gelatine.

Soak gelatine for 1 hour in a teacup of milk, put the remainder of the
milk over the fire with the sugar and gelatine till dissolved.

Add beaten yolks of eggs to the milk and stir well until on the verge
of boiling.

Have the whites beaten to a stiff froth in a bowl, into which pour the
contents of the pan. Stir up quickly and pour into a mould until set.


5. Lemon Mould.

  2-oz. cornflour.
  1-pint water.
  6-oz. castor sugar.
  2 lemons.
  Yolks of 2 eggs.

Mix the cornflour with a little of the water and put rest of water in
a pan with sugar and lemon rind. Bring to a boil and boil 5 minutes.
Strain into cornflour the lemon juice and yolks of eggs. Stir till it
boils and boil 3 minutes.


6. Baroness Pudding.

  ¾-lb. suet.
  ¾-lb. flour.
  ¾-lb. raisins.
  ½-pint milk.

Chop the suet, stone the raisins and cut in halves and mix with the
flour. Moisten with milk and boil 4 hours.


7. Holderness Pudding.

  ½-lb. suet.
  ½-lb. raisins.
  4 tablespoonsful treacle.
  ½-lb. currants.
  ½-lb. bread crumbs.
  1-pint milk.

Chop the suet and stone the raisins and mix all well together and boil
3½ hours.


8. Lemon Pudding.

  10-oz. bread crumbs.
  2-oz. butter.
  4 eggs.
  2-pints milk.
  ¼-lb. sugar.
  Grated rind of 1 lemon.

Bring the milk to boiling point, stir the butter in, and add the other
ingredients. Put pastry round a dish, fill with the mixture, and bake ¾
hour.


9. Parson’s Pudding.

  ¼-lb. chopped suet.
  ¼-lb. currants.
  1 tablespoonful moist sugar.
  ¼-lb. flour.
  ¼-lb. raisins.
  ½ teaspoonful ground ginger.
  ½ teaspoonful salt.

Mix well and boil 3 hours.


10. Queen’s Pudding.

  4-oz. bread crumbs.
  4 tablespoonsful strawberry jam.

Place in a pie dish, and pour custard on made from 1 egg and 1-pint
milk. Bake ½ hour.


11. Ideal Pudding.

  ½-pint bread crumbs.
  Grated rind of 1 lemon.
  1-oz. butter.
  1-pint boiling milk.
  1 tablespoonful sugar.
  Yolks of 2 eggs.

Butter a dish, pour in the mixture and bake until set. Beat the whites
of eggs and pile on the top of pudding and put in the oven to brown.


12. Curd Pudding.

  1-lb. curd.
  3 tablespoonsful bread crumbs.
  1 tablespoonful milk.
  2-oz. butter.
  2 tablespoonsful sugar.
  2 eggs.

Mix all together, and bake 20 minutes in the dish. Good either hot or
cold.


13. Chocolate Blanc Mange.

  1-oz. gelatine.
  1-pint milk.
  2-oz. grated chocolate or cocoa.
  ¼-lb. sugar.

Dissolve the gelatine in half of the pint of milk. Grate the chocolate
and mix it and the sugar to a smooth paste with a little milk. Place
the gelatine on the fire with rest of milk and when nearly boiling add
the chocolate, &c. Boil for 12 minutes, stirring all the time one way.
Put in a mould.


14. Suet Dumplings.

  ½-lb. suet.
  ¾-lb. flour.

Chop suet very fine, add flour and 1 teaspoonful baking powder (if
liked). Mix with water and boil. Be sure the water is boiling.


15. Snow Pudding.

  ½ small packet of gelatine.
  Juice of 2 lemons.
  5-oz. castor sugar.
  Whites of 3 eggs.

Put gelatine to soak in teacup of cold water for about ½ hour. Then
pour breakfast cup of boiling water on, when quite dissolved add lemon
juice and sugar, strain, add whites of eggs put in large bowl and beat
with egg whisk about ½ hour--more in hot weather.


16. French Pancakes.

  3 eggs.
  3-oz. sifted sugar.
  ¾-pint of warmed milk.
  3-oz. butter.
  3-oz. flour.

Beat eggs and add to butter, stir in sugar and flour. Mix well and add
the milk and beat a few minutes. Put on a buttered dish, and bake 20
minutes.


17. German Pancakes.

  2 tablespoonsful flour.
  2 eggs.
  2 teaspoonsful castor sugar.
  ½ cup milk.

Bake very quickly and eat at once.


18. Junket.

  1-pint new milk.
  3 or 4 nibs of sugar.
  1 tablespoonful rennet.
  Little nutmeg.

Make the milk warm, put the sugar in a basin, pour the milk into it and
stir well until the sugar is dissolved, then add the rennet and stir
very quickly, put in a cool place as gently as possible.


19. Three Minutes Pudding.

  1 tablespoonful flour.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.
  1 tablespoonful sugar.
  1 egg.

Beat the egg, add sugar &c., and beat well. Place in a dripping tin and
bake lightly. Take very quickly from the tin and spread with preserve
and roll up and sift sugar over. Eat with plain sauce.


20. German Pudding.

Toast some thin slices of stale bread quite brown, put in a dish with
jam between. Make a cold custard, of an egg and sufficient milk to fill
the dish, and 1 tablespoonful of sugar. Mix and pour over the toast and
stand 20 minutes. Put a little dripping on the top and bake brown.


21. Rhubarb Mould.

Rhubarb sufficient to fill a quart basin. Put in pan with 1-gill of
water and boil gently. Add sugar to taste with a little lemon juice,
stir well and pour out. Put with it ½-oz. gelatine (previously soaked
and dissolved). Add 5 or 6 drops of cochineal. Beat the rhubarb briskly
and when well mixed and cool turn into mould and leave to set. Serve
with whipped cream.


22. Imperial Pudding.

Grate 6-oz. bread crumbs, pare, core and slice 6-oz. apples. Well
grease pie dish, strew bread crumbs over the bottom and sides, cut a
thin slice of bread and lay in the bottom of dish on the crumbs, put
layer of apples and grate some nutmeg and strew 1 tablespoonful sugar
over the apples; next, layer of crumbs, then apples, &c., finishing
with crumbs. Mix 1 egg with ½-pint milk, pour over pudding, put a piece
of dripping on the top, place in the oven, and bake ¾ hour. Turn out on
hot dish.


23. Fig Pudding, (No. 1.)

  ¼-lb. flour.
  ¼-lb. suet.
  ¼-lb. bread crumbs.
  6-oz. chopped figs.

Mix with 2 eggs, and boil 2 or 3 hours.


24. Sultana Pudding.

  6-oz. flour.
  3-oz. sultanas.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.
  3-oz. suet.
  1-oz. sugar.
  1 egg.

Make to stiff dough with a little milk, and boil 3 hours.


25. Trieste Pudding.

Pare and core 1-lb. apples and stew in a little water and sugar to
taste with a few cloves. When cool mix a teacupful of bread crumbs
and yolks of 2 eggs with the apple. The bread should absorb the apple
juice, if not add more bread. Warm 1-oz. butter and stir in. Place in
greased dish, and bake 40 minutes. Whip whites of eggs to stiff froth,
pile on the pudding and lightly brown.


26. Stewed Figs.

Wash 1-lb. figs, place in pan, add enough boiling water to cover them;
add 1 tablespoonful treacle and 1 teaspoonful finely chopped lemon
peel. Cover the pan, and simmer till tender; serve cold.


27. Baked Milk (_For Fruit_).

Put ½-pint milk into a jar, and place in warm oven for 5 or 6 hours,
when it should be as thick as rich cream.


28. Baked Rhubarb Pudding.

Butter the bottom of a dish, and cover with bread crumbs, then a layer
of rhubarb, cut in 1-inch pieces. Sprinkle 1 tablespoonful of sugar
over, and fill the dish with alternate layers; the last layer must be
crumbs. Put a few bits of butter on the top and bake 1 hour.


29. Apple Snow.

Place sponge cakes in a glass dish, cover with custard, and leave to
soak a few hours. Cover with dry stewed apples to which has been added
sugar and lemon juice. Pile whisked whites of two eggs on the top and
serve.


30. Prune Mould.

  1-lb. prunes.
  1-oz. gelatine.
  Little cinnamon.
  3-oz. castor sugar.
  Few strips lemon rind.
  Few drops cochineal.

Clean the prunes and soak overnight, next day stew till soft, with
sugar and peel. Take out the stones, crack them, and keep the kernels.
Dissolve the gelatine in hot water, and stir into the fruit and sweeten
to taste. Have a plain mould wetted, and arrange kernels in it, and
pour in the prunes, &c., and set to cool. Turn out, scoop a hollow
place in the top of the mould with a silver knife dipped in boiling
water, and fill with whipped cream.


31. Bachelor’s Pudding.

  4-oz. suet.
  4-oz. flour.
  4-oz. apples.
  2-oz. sugar.
  4-oz. bread crumbs.
  4-oz. currants.
  3 eggs.
  Little nutmeg.
  Juice of 1 lemon.

Chop the apples and suet, add currants, &c. Beat well and boil 3 hours.


32. Raspberry Sponge.

  1 white of egg.
  1 tablespoonful lemon juice.
  ¼-pint sieved jam.
  1-oz. sugar.
  ½-oz. gelatine.
  ¼-pint water.

Dissolve gelatine, add egg and jam (heated to make it thin) whisk till
stiff. Pile on a glass dish. A few drops of cochineal if necessary.


33. Lemon Cream.

  ½-oz. gelatine.
  1 pint milk.
  1 egg.
  ½-pint water.
  4-oz. sugar.
  3 lemons.

Put the rind of 2 lemons in a pan with milk, and let it infuse. When
boiling, let it cool slightly, and pour on beaten egg. Melt the
gelatine in water and let it just reach boiling point, then add the
juice of 3 lemons and sugar. Slightly cool, then add to egg and milk.
If too hot it will curdle.


34. Gâteau de Riz.

  1 pint milk.
  2-oz. ground rice.
  ¼-pint sieved raspberry jam.
  1½-oz. castor sugar.
  ½-oz. gelatine.
  4 drops cochineal.

Cook the rice in the milk till it thickens, take it from the fire and
stir the sugar and jam in. Add the strained gelatine (which has been
dissolved in hot water), colour and serve. Whipped cream improves this
dish.


35. Kingston Puddings.

  3-oz. butter.
  2-oz. castor sugar.
  3-oz. flour.
  ¼-pint milk.

Melt butter, add sugar, etc. Bake in buttered cups ½ hour. Serve with
sauce.


36. Fig Pudding (No. 2.)

  ½-lb. figs.
  6-oz. brown sugar.
  ¼-lb. suet.
  Nutmeg to taste.
  ½-lb. bread crumbs.
  2 eggs.
  4-oz. flour.
  Little milk.

Mix well and steam 3 hours.


37. Cheese Pudding (No. 1).

  Few slices of thin bread and butter.
  1 egg.
  Pepper and salt.
  ½-pint milk.
  3-oz. grated cheese.
  Bread crumbs.

Grease a pie dish, and coat with crumbs. Put in a layer of bread and
butter, then cheese and seasoning, and so on, with a layer of cheese
on the top. Beat an egg, add it to the milk, and pour it on gradually.
There will seem to be too much liquid at first, but it will soak up.
Put a few bits of butter on the top. Bake until set.


38. Paragon Pudding.

  1-lb. cooked potatoes.
  5-oz. loaf sugar.
  2 lemons.
  2-oz. butter.
  2 eggs.
  Pinch of salt.

Rub the potatoes through a sieve while hot, melt the butter and add it
to them, then the grated rind, sugar, eggs, and lemon juice. Stir well.
Bake in a pie dish in a moderate oven 30 minutes. Turn out and serve
hot, sprinkled with sugar.


39. Cambridge Pudding.

  1-lb. flour.
  1 egg.
  ½-lb. apples, peeled, cored and sliced.
  1½-pts. skimmed milk.
  2-oz. sugar.

Make a smooth batter of flour, milk, and egg, add sugar and apples.
Pour into a well-greased basin. Boil 2 hours. Any fruit can be
substituted.


40. Sago Jelly.

  5-oz. sago.
  2-oz. castor sugar.
  1½-pints water.
  raspberry jam.

Soak the sago in the water overnight, then cook it till quite clear and
tender, and add sugar and jam to taste. Add a few drops of cochineal,
and pour into a mould. Turn out when cold and serve with custard.


41. Orange Meringue.

  3 oranges.
  sugar to taste.
  ¼-oz. cornflour.
  2 eggs.
  ½-pint milk.

Peel and slice oranges, and put them in a pie dish. Cook the rind in
the milk, and when boiling, strain the milk. Make a custard of it, and
the cornflour and yolks. Pour over oranges. When cold and set, beat the
whites stifly, add sugar and lemon juice, and pile on the top. Put in
the oven to set.


42. Spanish Custard.

  3 or 4 stale sponge cakes.
  2-oz. sweet almonds.
  1 teaspoonful vanilla.
  ¼-oz. cornflour.
  ½-pint milk.
  2 eggs.
  2-oz. chocolate.

Cut the cakes in strips, and pile in a glass dish. Add the vanilla to 2
tablespoonsful of milk, and put slowly on the cake, letting it all soak
in.

Make a custard of eggs, milk, and cornflour. Melt the chocolate in
a spoonful or two of milk, and add it to the custard. Sweeten if
necessary. Pour over the cake. Blanch, roughly chop, and brown the
almonds, and scatter over the whole.


43. Cheese Pudding (No. 2).

  4-ozs. bread crumbs.
  2 tablespoonsful grated cheese.
  Little pepper, salt and cayenne.
  2 eggs.
  Little milk.

Bake in a buttered dish sprinkled with grated cheese, and put small
pieces of butter on the top of the pudding.


44. Apple Trifle.

Peel and core some apples, and stew till tender, adding very little
water. Beat to a smooth pulp, sweeten to taste, flavour with lemon, and
when cold, put into a glass dish. Pour a thick custard over the apples,
and garnish with fancy biscuits.


45. Economic Custard.

Put 2 or 3 well-beaten eggs to nearly 1 quart of milk, and add about 1
tablespoonful cornflour mixed with a little of the milk. Pour into a
pan, and heat until thick enough, stirring all the time. When finished,
add sugar and flavouring to taste. Put in a cool place.


46. Tasmanian Pudding.

Take 2-oz. large sago and swell in a pan on the fire in ½-pint of milk.
Pare, core and slice 2 large apples, put them in the oven with a little
sugar and water and cook till tender. Take the sago from the fire when
it has absorbed the milk. Beat up 1 egg with 1 pint of milk, mix with
the sago, and add ½ teaspoonful grated ginger. When the apples are
tender, mix all well together, and put in a pie dish and bake ½ hour.


47. Yorkshire Pudding.

  4 or 5 tablespoonsful flour.
  Milk.
  2 eggs.

Put the flour into a bowl and make to smooth paste with a little milk,
add the eggs without beating them, then beat 3 or 4 minutes adding more
milk until the batter is the desired thickness, (a little thinner than
cake mixture.) Have ready a dripping tin with a depth of ¼ inch of hot
dripping in it and pour the batter in and bake in a hot oven about 20
minutes.


48. Steamed Batter Pudding.

Make the same as Yorkshire pudding, putting the batter into a cloth,
wrung out in boiling water and steam 1½ hours. Serve with jam or
raspberry vinegar.


49. Chocolate Pudding.

  ¼-lb. bread crumbs.
  2-oz. castor sugar.
  1-pint milk.
  2 eggs.
  1-oz. cocoa.
  vanilla essence.

Boil the milk, add the cocoa, stir in the bread crumbs, sugar, yolks of
eggs and essence, bake in a slow oven till set, whip the whites to a
stiff froth, and cover the pudding. Put in the oven to brown slightly.


50. Gêlée à la Normandie.

A packet of blanc mange powder made as directed, pour into small
dariole moulds. Dissolve a packet of raspberry jelly and pour on a
meat dish, so that it will be ½ inch thick. When both are set turn the
blanc manges on to a dish, and cut out rounds of jelly with a fluted
pastry-cutter, and place on the top of the blanc manges. Chop the
remainder of jelly and garnish with it.


51. Chocolate Blanc Mange.

  3-oz. cornflour.
  2-oz. sugar.
  Few drops of vanilla.
  1¾-pints milk.
  1-oz. cocoa.

Mix cornflour and cocoa in a basin, with sufficient milk to make a
smooth paste, and add rest of milk, boil till thick. Add sugar and
flavouring, and turn into wet mould to set.


52. Eastbourne Pudding.

  6-oz. flour.
  2-oz. sugar.
  1½ teaspoonsful baking powder.
  4-oz. butter or lard.
  4-oz. sultanas.
  1 egg.

Bake in good oven ¾ hour.


53. Summerville Plum Pudding.

  1½-lbs. suet.
  ½-lb. candied peel.
  1-lb. raisins (stoned).
  1-lb. sultanas.
  9 eggs.
  1-lb. currants.
  1 nutmeg (grated).
  ½-lb. bread crumbs.
  1-lb. flour.
  ¼-pint brandy.

Boil 11 hours.


54. Victoria Pudding.

  2 teacups flour.
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.
  1 cupful castor sugar.
  2 tablespoonsful butter.
  1 egg.

Mix with a little milk. Beat well and bake in a greased dish until
brown. Serve with sauce.


55. Prune Gâteau.

  1-lb. prunes.
  3-oz. sugar.
  ¾-pint water.
  ½-oz. gelatine.

Well wash the prunes and stew in ½-pint of the water. Rub through a
sieve. Dissolve the gelatine in the remaining ¼-pint of water, and add
it to the prune pulp. Colour with a little cochineal. Put all into a
mould, and sprinkle with cocoanut when it is turned out.


56. Raspberry Pudding.

2 eggs and their weight in flour, butter and sugar, 2 tablespoonsful
raspberry jam, and ½ teaspoonful carbonate of soda. Mix all well
together and boil or steam 2 hours. Serve with sauce.


57. Rice Pudding.

Put 2 tablespoonsful rice into a dish, and fill up with milk. Add 1
tablespoonful Demerara sugar and a tiny piece of butter.

Bake in a steady oven at least 1½ hours.


58. Small Sago Pudding.

Put 2 tablespoonsful sago into a dish and just cover with cold water.
Place in the oven, and when the water has been all soaked up, take from
the oven and beat well with a fork, adding gradually sufficient milk to
nearly fill the dish. Add a tablespoonful sugar and a well-beaten egg.
Cook for about three-quarters of an hour.


59. Ground Rice Pudding.

Put into a pan two or three tablespoonsful of ground rice and as much
milk as the size of the pudding requires. Simmer for about 20 minutes
and turn into a dish. Add sugar and a beaten egg and put into the oven
for about half an hour.


60. Custard Pudding.

Beat 2 eggs well and add them to 1 pint of milk and sweeten to taste,
adding a little grated nutmeg. Place all in a dish and bake slowly for
about an hour. Be careful not to let the mixture boil, or the pudding
will not be quite so nice.


61. Stewed Pears.

  8 large pears.
  6 cloves.
  5-oz. loaf sugar.
  ½-pint water.

Peel the pears, halve them, and remove the cores and leave the stalks
on. Put them into a lined saucepan with the above ingredients, and let
them simmer very gently until tender, which will be in 3 or 4 hours.
As each one is done, carefully lift out without breaking on to a glass
dish. Boil up the syrup 2 or 3 minutes, cool a little and pour over the
pears. Add a few drops of cochineal to improve the colour. Do not let
the fruit boil, but gently simmer.


62. Harrogate Pudding.

Take about a pound of any kind of red fruit and stew it (with sugar
to taste) in a pan until tender. Line a basin or mould with slices of
bread about half-an-inch thick. Strain the fruit into the mould and
cover with bread. Pour as much juice over the whole as will completely
saturate the bread. Put a heavy plate on the top for at least 2 hours.
Turn out on to a dish and pour any remaining juice round.




IV. SAUCES.


1. Apple Sauce.

Pare, core, and slice 6 apples, put them in a pan with ½-oz. butter,
1-oz. moist sugar, ¼ teaspoonful grated nutmeg, and 1 teacupful of cold
water. Boil till the apples are reduced to a pulp, beat with fork and
serve.


2. Bread Sauce.

(_A Quick Way of making it._)

Put about ½-pint milk into a pan, with some stale bread broken in, let
it boil and then beat with a fork. If not stiff enough, add more bread.
Season with pepper and salt, and serve.


3. Melted Butter.

  2 tablespoonsful flour.
  Butter size of walnut.
  1 pint water.

Put the flour in a basin, and mix with a little cold water, then pour
boiling water on, stirring well all the time. Put all in a pan, and
boil till thick enough. If it is lumpy, strain and put in a sauce-boat,
with the butter in the middle.


4. Egg Sauce.

Make same as for Melted Butter, adding 1 or 2 hard-boiled eggs finely
chopped. If Parsley Sauce is required add parsley instead of eggs.


5. White Sauce.

  2 tablespoonsful flour.
  1 pint milk.

Mix the flour with a little milk, and then add the rest of milk. Put in
a pan and boil until it is the thickness required. Strain if necessary.
This is used for fowls, rabbits, &c.


6. Mint Sauce.

Chop some mint very finely, and place in a sauce-boat. Add a
dessertspoonful of sugar, and enough vinegar to cover it well. Do not
make this sauce long before it is required, as the mint will turn
yellow.


7. Onion Sauce.

Peel the onions, and boil till tender, squeeze the water from them and
chop them. Add them to white sauce (recipe given), boil all up once and
serve.




V. CAKES.


A few hints about Cakes.

Unless otherwise specified the general rule in making cakes is to cream
the butter and sugar together, then add the eggs, then flour and baking
powder (mix the baking powder with the flour) and then add fruit or
other ingredients and beat well. If fruit is to be added do not make
the cake very soft, or currants, &c., will be liable to sink, but they
are less likely to do so if previously rubbed in flour.

Always grease cake tins with lard as the cakes will be less liable to
burn than if the tins are rubbed with butter.

Do not open the oven door for at least twenty minutes after cakes are
put in, and then do it very gently as a sudden action will tend to make
a cake sink in the middle.


1. Madeira Cake.

  ¼-lb. butter.
  3 eggs.
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.
  ½-lb. castor sugar.
  ½-lb. flour.
  Little milk if necessary.

Put candied peel on the top when nearly done.


2. Beverleigh Buns.

  ¼-lb. cornflour.
  2-oz. sugar.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.
  2-oz. butter.
  2 eggs.

Bake in patty pans.


3. Queen Cakes.

  ¼-lb. butter.
  3 eggs.
  3-oz. currants.
  1 teacup milk.
  Almond essence.
  ½-lb. castor sugar.
  1-lb. flour.
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.

Bake in patty pans in brisk oven.


4. Raspberry Sandwich.

2 eggs with their weight in sugar, butter and flour and 1 teaspoonful
baking powder. Bake in slow oven.


5. Rock Buns.

  1-lb. flour
  3-oz. sugar.
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.
  ¼-lb. dripping (rubbed in).
  6-oz. currants.
  1 egg beaten with little milk.

Mix all together, and bake in rough lumps on floured baking sheet.


6. Cornflour Cake.

  ¼-lb. butter.
  1 egg.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.
  ½-lb. castor sugar.
  ½-lb. cornflour.
  Lemon essence.

Bake in small dripping tin.


7. Oatmeal Buns.

  6-oz. coarse oatmeal.
  3-ozs. lard or butter (rubbed in).
  4-oz. sugar.
  Pinch of salt.
  ½-lb. flour.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.
  1 egg.
  Little milk.

Bake either in lumps on sheet or in patty pans.


8. Lemon Sandwich Cakes.

Weight of 1 egg in flour, butter, castor sugar, and ground rice. 1
teaspoonful baking powder. Beat all together, and spread on two greased
plates. Bake ten minutes, and spread lemon curd between.


9. Yorkshire Parkin.

  1-lb. coarse oatmeal.
  ½-lb. lard or dripping.
  ½-lb. brown sugar.
  2 teaspoonsful mixed spices.
  Juice of 1 lemon.
  1-lb. flour.
  1-lb. treacle.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.
  2 teaspoonsful ginger.
  3 eggs and a little milk.

Bake in dripping tin in slow oven.


10. Drummond Cake.

  2-oz. butter.
  6-oz. castor sugar.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.
  ½-lb. currants.
  ½-oz. carraway seeds.
  2-oz. lard.
  ¾-lb. flour.
  2-oz. peel.
  1 teaspoonful ginger.
  3 eggs and a little milk.

Bake in moderate oven.


11. Gingerbread.

  10-oz. flour.
  ¼-lb. brown sugar.
  1-oz. candied peel.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.
  2-oz. butter (rubbed in).
  ¼-lb. treacle.
  1-oz. ground ginger.
  1 egg.
  Little milk.

Bake in dripping tin, and cut in squares when cold.


12. Ginger Nuts.

  1-lb. flour.
  ¼-lb. treacle.
  ¼-lb. butter.
  ½-oz. ginger.

Melt the butter in a pan, add the treacle, and when quite hot mix with
a wooden spoon to the flour and ginger.

Roll between the hands into nuts, and bake on greased tin for 20
minutes.


13. Victoria Roll.

  2 eggs.
  2-oz. flour.
  3-oz. castor sugar.
  ½ teaspoonful baking powder.

Butter a tin and pour in the mixture, and bake 10 minutes in a quick
oven. Quickly spread with jam, roll up, and sprinkle with castor sugar.


14. Yorkshire Cake.

1 egg and its weight in flour, sugar, butter, and ground rice. 1
teaspoonful baking powder and a little milk. Spread on two greased
plates and bake. Spread jam on one and press the other on the top.


15. Sally Lunn Teacakes (No. 1).

  1¾-lb. flour
  ¼-lb. butter or lard.
  2 teacupsful castor sugar.
  1d. yeast.

Mix well with warm milk to a stiff batter, then beat with the hand for
20 minutes. Place in tins, and allow them to rise before putting in the
oven.


16. Summerville Cakes.

  3-oz. butter.
  3 eggs.
  ¼-lb. flour.
  ¼ teaspoonful baking powder.
  3-oz. sugar.
  ¼-lb. grated chocolate.
  6 drops essence of vanilla.
  Tablespoonful of milk.

Bake in small patty pans.


17. Soda Cake.

  ¼-lb. butter or dripping.
  3 eggs.
  ½-lb. currants.
  1 teacupful of milk.
  ½-lb. moist sugar.
  1-lb. flour.
  1 teaspoonful carbonate of soda.

Bake in a moderate oven about 1 hour.


18. Brunswick Cakes.

  ¼-lb. butter.
  1 egg.
  ¼-lb. currants.
  2-oz. mixed peel.
  Grated rind of 1 lemon.
  2-oz. sugar.
  ½-lb. flour.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.

Add a little milk, but the mixture should be stiff. Drop on to a baking
sheet in pieces the size of a walnut.


19. Jordan Cakes.

  1-oz. butter.
  1 egg.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.
  1 teacupful sugar.
  1 teacupful flour.
  Pinch of salt.

Mix and bake at once in a moderate oven. Cut in two when cold and
spread with jam.


20. Lunch Cake.

  1-lb. flour.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.
  3 eggs.
  1-oz. carraway seeds.
  Little milk.
  ¼-lb. dripping (rubbed in).
  1 teacupful sugar.
  1 cup of milk.
  ¼-lb. currants.

Bake 1½ hours.


21. Plain Plum Cake.

  ¼-lb. butter.
  3 eggs.
  ½-lb. currants.
  ½-pint milk.
  ½-lb. sugar.
  ¾-lb. flour.
  2-oz. candied peel.
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.

Cream the butter, add the sugar and eggs, then rest of ingredients.
Bake in moderate oven.


22. Rice Buns.

  ½-lb. butter.
  2 eggs.
  ½-lb. ground rice.
  1-oz. lemon peel.
  ½-lb. castor sugar.
  ½-lb. flour.
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.

  Mix with milk.

Bake in patty pans.


23. Raspberry Buns.

  6-oz. flour.
  4-oz. butter (rubbed in).
  Yolk of 1 egg.
  6-oz. ground rice.
  8-oz. granulated sugar.
  Little milk.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.

Make into a stiff paste, and roll in the hands to size of walnuts. Make
a hole in the middle, put in a little jam and close up. Bake in slow
oven.


24. Walnut Cake.

  4-oz. butter.
  3 eggs.
  6-oz. chopped walnuts.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.
  4-oz. castor sugar.
  ½-lb. flour.
  Essence of vanilla.

Bake in tea cake tins in fairly hot oven.


25. Icing for Walnut Cake.

  3-oz. chocolate.
  ¼ or ½-pint water.
  ½-lb. icing sugar.

Put the chocolate in a pan with water. Allow it to boil, then add
sugar, but do not let it boil. Pour over cake. Decorate with half
walnuts.


26. Cocoanut Pyramids.

  3-oz. cocoanut.
  1 dessertspoonful cornflour.
  1½-oz. castor sugar.
  1 white of egg (stiff).

Mix sugar, cocoanut, and cornflour together. Whip the white of egg and
add it. Form in small pyramids on buttered paper. Bake a few minutes
till the outside is set.


27. London Buns.

  3-oz. butter.
  2 eggs.
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.
  ¼-lb. brown sugar.
  1-lb. flour.
  3-oz. candied peel.
  Juice and grated rind of 1 lemon.

Mix with a little milk, and bake in patty pans.


28. Victoria Buns.

  2-oz. butter.
  1 egg.
  ½-oz. currants.
  ½-oz. candied peel.
  2-oz. castor sugar.
  ¼-lb. flour.
  1½-oz. ground rice.
  Little milk.

Bake in brisk oven in patty pans.


29. Norwegian Cake.

  2-oz. butter.
  2 eggs.
  ½-lb. currants.
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.
  ¼-lb. sugar.
  1-lb. flour.
  2-oz. lemon peel.
  Little milk.

Very good made in bread tins to butter.


30. Sultana Cake.

  ¼-lb. butter.
  3 eggs.
  ¾-lb. flour.
  ½-lb. sultanas.
  ½-lb. castor sugar.
  ½-lb. ground rice.
  3 teaspoonsful baking powder.
  Little milk.

These cakes must be fairly stiff, or the sultanas will sink to the
bottom. Will make two good-sized cakes.


31. Cocoanut Cake.

2 eggs and their weight in flour, sugar and butter. Beat all together,
and add a few drops of cochineal. Add 5 or 6 drops of vanilla essence.
Then add the flour, and 4 chopped candied greengages, 2-oz. cocoanut,
and two teaspoonsful of baking powder.


32. Lancashire Parkin.

  1½-lb. fine oatmeal.
  ½-lb. butter (rubbed in).
  1 teaspoonful ginger.
  1 teaspoonful carbonate soda.
  ½-lb. flour.
  ½-lb. sugar.
  1-lb. treacle.
  1 egg.

Dissolve the soda in 2 teacups of milk. Melt the treacle and butter
together, beat the egg in, and add the soda last. Mix well. Bake in a
slow oven in a dripping tin.


33. Delicious Cake.

  ¼-lb. butter.
  3 eggs.
  ½ teaspoonful carbonate soda.
  Little milk.
  ½-lb. castor sugar.
  ½-lb. flour.
  1 teaspoonful cream of tartar.
  8 drops vanilla essence.

Mix well together, and bake in moderate oven.


34. Chocolate Cake.

  ¼-lb. butter.
  3 eggs.
  ½-lb. flour.
  6-oz. sugar.
  2-oz. chocolate.
  1 teaspoonful vanilla essence.

Dissolve the chocolate over the fire in ¾ teacup of milk and add it to
the cake when still warm.


35. Rich Plum Cake.

  ½-lb. butter.
  4 eggs.
  ½-lb. currants.
  ½ nutmeg.
  ½-lb. flour.
  ½-lb. Demerara sugar.
  ¼-lb. raisins (stoned and chopped).
  3-oz. lemon peel.

When the cake is in the tin push in a few thick lumps of citron. Bake 2
hours.


36. Plain Seed or Currant Loaf.

  2-lbs. flour.
  ¼-lb. moist sugar.
  4-oz. dripping (rubbed in).
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.
  1-oz. carraway seeds or ½-lb. currants.

Form into light dough with milk and bake in bread tins.


37. Malta Cake.

Weight of 2 eggs in butter, sugar and flour, grated rind of 1 orange,
little milk, 2 teaspoonsful baking powder, 2 eggs. Mix well and bake
in dripping tin. Turn the cake on to a board when done, and ice as
follows. Icing:--Squeeze the juice of 1 orange into a basin and add as
much icing sugar as will make it thick. Spread while the cake is hot.
When cold cut in shapes.


38. Small Rice Cake.

  3-oz. butter.
  2 eggs.
  ¼-lb. ground rice.
  ¼-lb. sugar.
  ¼-lb. flour.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.

Add as much milk as will make it fairly soft. Bake in a moderate oven.


39. Parisian Sandwich.

  2-oz. butter.
  2 eggs.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.
  2-oz. sugar.
  3-oz. flour.
  Little milk.

Pour on two greased plates and bake. Prepare filling. Put ½ teacupful
of sugar, 1 dessertspoonful of cornflour, mixed with ½ teacupful of
cold water, into a pan and simmer till thick. When cold, add beaten
yolk of 1 egg, and enough lemon juice to flavour well. Spread the
mixture on one cake, and press the other on the top.


40. Sultana Scones.

2-oz. butter, rubbed into 1-lb. flour, 2 teaspoonsful baking powder,
and a little salt. Mix to a light dough with sour milk, and work in a
handful of sultanas. Roll an inch thick, and cut in shape and bake.


41. York Tea Cakes.

  2-oz. butter.
  ¼-lb. castor sugar.
  2-lbs. flour.
  1 teaspoonful salt.
  2-oz. lard.
  3 eggs.
  1-pint milk.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.

Work about 10 minutes, and add a few currants. Bake in quick oven.


42. Fairy Cakes.

  3-oz. butter.
  3 eggs.
  1 grated lemon rind.
  3-oz. minced cherries.
  Little milk.
  3-oz. castor sugar.
  8-oz. flour.
  Few drops of cochineal.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.

Bake in queen cake tins or patty pans.


43. Orange Rock Cakes.

  3-oz. butter.
  2 eggs.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.
  Little milk.
  6-oz. castor sugar.
  1-lb. flour.
  Grated rind of 1 orange.
  1 orange juice.

Either bake in patty pans or drop on floured shelf.


44. Jersey Cake.

  2-oz. butter.
  2 eggs.
  2-oz. corn flour.
  2-oz. castor sugar.
  2-oz. flour.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.

Beat 5 minutes, and bake in small dripping tin.


45. Seed Bread (_To Butter_).

  3½-lbs. flour.
  1-lb. sugar.
  2-oz. carraway seeds.
  ¼-lb. lard (rubbed in).
  1d. yeast.
  2-oz. candied peel.

After kneeding well, let it stand 4 hours. Then put in tins and let it
rise a few minutes before baking.


46. Queen Anne’s Cake.

  3-oz. butter.
  6-oz. castor sugar.
  ½-lb. flour.
  1 teaspoonful grated ginger.
  1-oz. lard.
  2 eggs.
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.
  2-oz. candied peel.

Beat well with a little milk and bake.


47. Spice Bread.

  1½-lbs. flour.
  4-oz. sugar.
  3 teaspoonsful baking powder.
  1½-lbs. sultanas.
  1-pint buttermilk.
  5-oz. lard (rubbed in).
  2-oz. candied peel.
  2 eggs.
  ½-lb. currants.
  Pinch of salt.

Bake in bread tins.


48. Bachelor’s Buttons.

  6-oz. butter.
  3 yolks and 2 whites of eggs.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.
  ½-lb. castor sugar.
  15-oz. flour.
  ½ teaspoonful lemon essence.

Rub the butter into the flour, add the other ingredients and mix well.
Divide into pieces the size of a walnut. Dip each with a fork into the
third white of egg and roll in coarse sugar or finely chopped almonds
or desiccated cocoanut.


49. Cocoanut Fingers.

  3-oz. butter.
  2 eggs.
  6-oz. flour.
  2-oz. castor sugar.
  ¼-lb. cocoanut.

Roll into cork shapes, and roll in cocoanut and bake.


50. Victorine Buns.

  ¼-lb. butter.
  2 eggs.
  3-oz. ground rice.
  3-oz. sultanas.
  ¼-lb. castor sugar.
  ½-lb. flour.
  2-oz. peel.
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.

Bake in patty pans.


51. Orange Cakes.

  2-oz. butter.
  ¼-lb. castor sugar.
  2 eggs.
  ½-lb. flour.
  1 orange rind (grated).
  Little milk.
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.

Bake in a moderate oven in tea cake tins.


52. Ginger Cakes.

  2-oz. butter.
  2½-oz. castor sugar.
  1 egg.
  7-oz. flour.
  1-oz. treacle.
  ½-oz. grated ginger.
  ½ teaspoonful baking powder.

Bake in small cakes.


53. Cherry Cakes.

  3-oz. butter.
  ¼-lb. castor sugar.
  ½-lb. flour.
  2 eggs.
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.
  3-oz. chopped candied cherries.
  Few drops of vanilla essence.
  Little milk.

Cream the butter and sugar, add eggs, etc. Mix well and put in deep
tins and bake. When cold, ice with water icing, and place a cherry on
the top.


54. Small Seed Cakes.

  3-oz. butter.
  6-oz. sugar.
  2 eggs.
  ½-lb. flour.
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.
  1-oz. carraway seeds.

Add a little milk if necessary, and bake in tea cake tins.


55. Lemon Jumbles.

  3-oz. butter.
  5-oz. castor sugar.
  1 egg.
  14-oz. flour.
  3 teaspoonsful milk.
  1 teaspoonful cream of tartar.
  ½ teaspoonful carbonate of soda.
  Juice of 2 lemons.
  Rind of 1 lemon.

Cream the butter and sugar, add the egg, stir in the milk, juice and
rind. Mix the soda and tartar in the flour, and stir it in gradually
till the paste is rather stiff. Roll out rather thin. Cut in ovals with
cutter, and bake in a quick oven about 5 minutes.


56. Cocoanut Gingerbread.

  ½-lb. flour.
  2-oz. sugar.
  1 teaspoonful carbonate soda.
  ½-gill milk.
  1 egg.
  ½-lb. treacle.
  2-oz. butter.
  ¼-lb. cocoanut.
  ¼-oz. ginger.

Dissolve the butter and sugar and syrup and add the other ingredients
and lastly the soda dissolved in milk. Bake 1 hour.


57. Lemon Buns.

  3-oz. butter.
  6-oz. sugar.
  2 eggs.
  ½-lb. flour.
  Grated peel of 1 lemon.
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.

Bake in patty pans in a moderate oven.


58. Ashton Sandwiches.

Beat 3 eggs with 3-oz. sugar for 10 minutes, add 3-oz. flour and bake
in a flat tin lined with buttered paper. They will not take more than
7 minutes to bake. When cold, cut in fingers, divide each through the
middle, spread with jam, ice on the top and decorate with preserved
cherries or angelica.


59. Christmas or Wedding Cake.

  1-lb. flour.
  1-lb. butter.
  1-lb. Demerara sugar.
  ½-lb. Valencia raisins.
  1½-lbs. currants.
  ½-lb. candied peel.
  ½-lb. citron.
  9 English eggs.
  ½ nutmeg.
  Wine glass of rum.

Beat the butter to cream, add sugar, add flour by degrees, then eggs,
and beat with a wooden spoon 20 minutes. Add raisins (weighed after
they are stoned and chopped) and rest of fruit, etc. and mix well and
put in a tin. Cut the citron in thick pieces (1 inch long) and push
into the cake here and there. Bake 5 hours in slow oven.


Almond Paste.

  1½-lbs. ground almonds.
  2½-lbs. castor sugar.
  ½ small packet of gelatine.

Mix the almonds and sugar and bind with a very little dissolved
gelatine. Put on the cake with a knife.


Icing.

Put 2-lbs. icing sugar in a bowl and moisten with the beaten whites
of 2 eggs and lemon juice, or a little dissolved gelatine. Pour over
the cake and make smooth with a knife dipped in water. Ornament with
crystalized fruits or crystals put on when the icing is soft. Put in
dry place to dry.


60. Split Cakes.

Rub 3-oz. butter into 1-lb. flour; add 1 tablespoonful castor sugar and
2 teaspoonsful baking powder. Form into small flat cakes, and bake just
in time to serve hot. Split open and butter.


61. Baking Powder Rolls.

Mix one dessertspoonful of baking powder with ½-lb. flour, and add 1
teaspoonful salt; moisten with milk to rather stiff dough. Roll out and
bake quickly.


62. American Cake.

  ¾ cup of flour.
  ½ cup sugar (castor).
  3 eggs.
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.
  Little milk.

Whisk eggs for 15 minutes, add sugar and whisk 10 minutes more. Stir
in the flour and baking powder, and add a little milk to moisten. Pour
into shallow tins, and bake in a quick oven. When baked, put orange
filling between layers of cake.


Orange Filling.

Grate 2 apples and the rinds of 2 oranges and 2 lemons, add 2-oz.
sugar, 2 teaspoonsful arrowroot, 1 egg, a little milk, and 1-oz.
butter. Put all in a pan, and cook till thick.


63. Shrewsbury Cakes.

  3-oz. castor sugar.
  4-oz. butter.
  1 egg.
  1 lemon rind (grated).
  8-oz. flour.

Cream the butter and sugar, add egg and lemon rind, stir well, shake
flour in gradually, making a smooth paste. Roll out thinly, cut in
rounds, and bake in a moderate oven.


64. Swiss Roll.

  2-oz. butter.
  2-oz. castor sugar.
  2 eggs.
  ¼-lb. flour.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.
  2½ teaspoonsful milk.
  Grated rind of ½ a lemon.

Bake about 8 minutes in a long dripping tin, turn out on sugared paper,
spread jam on, and roll quickly.


65. Westwood Buns.

  3-oz. butter.
  6-oz. castor sugar
  3 eggs.
  ½-lb. flour.
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.
  3-oz. cocoanut.

Cream the butter and sugar, add eggs and rest of ingredients. Drop on
floured baking-tin and bake.


66. Sally Lunn Tea Cakes. (No. 2).

Mix ½ teaspoonful salt in 1-lb. flour, and add 3 tablespoonsful sugar.
Melt ½-oz. butter in ½-pint of new milk, and when milk-warm pour it
over ½-oz. German yeast. Add a well-beaten egg and grated nutmeg. Stir
lightly into the flour with a wooden spoon, cover with a cloth, and set
in a warm place to rise. Place in tins, and bake 15 to 20 minutes.


67. Queen Cakes (No. 2).

3 eggs, their weight in butter, sugar, flour and currants, and the
grated rind of 1 lemon, 2 teaspoonsful baking powder. Cream the butter
and sugar together, and add the rest of ingredients. Beat thoroughly,
place in tins, and bake 20 minutes.


68. Neapolitan Ribbon Cake.

  Weight of 3 eggs in butter.
  Castor sugar and flour.
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.
  Little milk.

Cream the butter and sugar, and add the eggs, and beat well, adding
flour and baking powder. Mix well for 3 or 4 minutes, and add milk if
it is too thick. Divide the mixture into three parts. Leave one part
its natural colour, colour another pink with a few drops of cochineal,
and add one pennyworth of melted chocolate to the third part. Divide
each portion into two parts, and bake the six divisions thus obtained
in tea cake tins in a cool oven, so that they will not rise in the
middle. When done, turn out, and when cold, pile one on the top of the
other, with a little icing between each layer to stick them together.

Ice the whole cake with the following icing:--Mix ½-lb. of icing sugar
stifly with some cold water or orange juice, and spread it over the
cake with a knife. Decorate with cherries or sweets.


69. Clancarthy Buns.

  ¼-lb. flour.
  2-oz. butter.
  2 dessertspoonsful castor sugar.
  ½ teaspoonful baking powder.

Mix with a little milk. Roll out with the hand about the thickness of a
finger and twist into fancy shapes and bake until crisp.


70. Spice Bread.

  2-lbs. flour.
  1-lb. Demerara sugar.
  1-lb. currants.
  1-lb. raisins.
  4 eggs.
  1 pint milk.
  ¼-lb. peel.
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.
  A little grated ginger and nutmeg.
  ¼-lb. treacle.

Mix well and bake in a slow oven.


71. Swiss Cakes (_Another Method_).

  2 eggs.
  ¼-lb. castor sugar.
  ¼-lb. flour.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.
  3-oz. butter.
  Vanilla essence.

Beat the eggs, then add the sugar, flour, and baking powder, and lastly
the butter, which has previously been melted in the oven.


72. Genoa Cake.

  6-oz. butter.
  ½-lb. sugar.
  4 eggs.
  12-oz. flour.
  8-oz. sultanas.
  3-oz. candied peel.
  Grated rind of a lemon.
  3-oz. almonds.
  1 tablespoonful milk.
  3 teaspoonsful baking powder.

Cream the butter and sugar, add the beaten eggs and beat well. Add the
flour and baking powder and beat about 10 minutes. Add the fruit, etc.,
mix well, and place in small bread tins. Blanch the almonds and cut in
halves, and scatter over the top of the cakes, and bake about 1½ hours.


73. Fairy Baskets.

  3-oz. butter.
  ¼-lb. castor sugar.
  6-oz. flour.
  2 eggs.
  2-oz. cocoanut.
  ¼-pint cream.
  A little jam.
  Angelica.

Cream the sugar and butter, add the beaten eggs and flour, and mix well.

Fill some deep patty pans with the mixture and bake about 15 minutes.

When the cakes are cold, cut out the centres, spread the outside with
a little jam, and decorate plentifully with cocoanut. Fill the centres
with jam, and place whipped cream on the top. Cut the angelica into
strips and arrange to form the handles.


74. Fancy Bread (_Without Yeast_).

  1-lb. flour.
  ½-pint milk.
  2-oz. Paisley flour.
  Pinch of salt.
  Dessertspoonful castor sugar.

Mix the Paisley flour, sugar, flour, and salt well together, and mix
into light dough with the milk. Make up into fancy shapes and bake in a
quick oven 15 minutes.




VI. BISCUITS.


1. Picnic Biscuits.

  1-lb. flour.
  2-oz. castor sugar.
  ½ teaspoonful carbonate soda.
  2-oz. butter (rubbed in).
  Pinch of salt.
  Few carraway seeds and a little milk.

Mix very stiff and roll out ¼ inch thick.


2. Rice Biscuits.

  ½-lb. flour.
  ½-lb. butter.
  2 eggs.
  ½-lb. ground rice.
  ½-lb. castor sugar.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.

Rub the butter into the flour and rice, add the rest of the ingredients
and mix and roll out.


3. Shrewsbury Biscuits.

  ¼-lb. butter.
  ¼-lb. sugar.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.
  6-oz. flour.
  1 egg.

Roll them out thin and bake.


4. Ginger Drops.

  8-oz. sugar.
  Beaten white of 1 egg.
  2 teaspoonsful essence ginger.

Mix well and drop on greased paper and put them in the oven. They are
done as soon as they can be taken off the paper.


5. Seventy Little Biscuits for 2d.

Put the white of an egg into a basin and beat to a stiff froth with
a silver fork, gradually add ½-lb. of castor sugar, and flavour with
essence of almonds. Mix well to a thick white paste. Take some sheets
of greased white paper and place on the baking sheet, then take a small
spoon and drop pieces of the mixture on the paper, keeping them ½ inch
apart. Put in a cool oven till they change colour. Take from the oven
and let them get cold and then remove with a knife from the paper. A
few drops of cochineal added to half the mixture will make a variety.


6. Ginger Biscuits.

  1-lb. flour.
  ¼-lb. butter.
  ½-lb. sugar.
  ¾-oz. ground ginger.
  2 eggs.
  1 teaspoonful baking powder.


7. Rice Biscuits.

  1-lb. rice flour.
  ¼-lb. sugar.
  ¼-lb. butter.
  2 eggs.


8. Seed Biscuits.

  1-lb. flour.
  ¼-lb. butter
  ¼-lb. sugar.
  3 eggs.
  ½-oz. carraway seeds.

Brush them over with a little milk.


9. Soda Biscuits.

  1-lb. flour.
  ¼-lb. butter.
  ½-lb. sugar.
  1 teaspoonful carbonate of soda.
  2 eggs.


10. Sweet Biscuits.

  2 breakfast cups flour.
  1 cup castor sugar.
  3-ozs. butter.
  2 eggs.
  ½ teaspoonful baking powder.
  Little milk.

Mix very stiff and bake on a floured tin.


11. Chestnut Biscuits.

  ½-lb. of chestnuts.
  ¼-lb. sugar.
  Essence of vanilla.
  2-oz. grated chocolate.
  One-sixteenth of a pint of water.

Boil the chestnuts till they are tender, rub them through a sieve, and
add the sugar. Melt the chocolate in water over the fire till smooth,
and add to the chestnut pulp. Lightly mix in the white of an egg very
stiffly whipped. Drop on wafer-paper in rocky little lumps. Bake in a
moderate oven till they are dry on the outside.


12. Cocoanut Biscuits.

  ¼-lb. butter.
  1 breakfast cup of flour.
  1 breakfast cup of sugar.
  1 breakfast cup of ground rice.
  3 teaspoonsful baking powder.
  ¼-lb. cocoanut.
  2 eggs.
  Little milk.


13. 4-lbs. Biscuits for 8d.

  2-lbs. flour.
  ½-lb. lard.
  ¾-lb. moist sugar.
  2 teaspoonsful baking powder.

Mix with water or milk.


14. Chocolate Biscuits.

  2-oz. butter.
  2-oz. sugar.
  1 yolk of egg.
  ¼-lb. flour.
  2-oz. chocolate.

Dissolve the chocolate with a very little water and vanilla over the
fire. Cream the butter and sugar, beat well, add yolk, then chocolate
and half of flour, beat well, then work in rest of flour by hand. Roll
out very lightly and bake a few minutes.


15. Cinnamon Stars.

  1½ whites of eggs.
  1-oz. castor sugar.
  4-oz. ground almonds.
  ½-oz. cinnamon.

Mix all to stiff dough, roll out on a board sprinkled with sugar and
flour, and cut in stars. Bake in a moderate oven. Brush with white of
egg and return to the oven to glaze.


16. Ratafias.

1 egg, its weight in sugar and butter, ¼-lb. flour, 1 teaspoonful
baking powder, few drops of essence of ratafia. Cream the butter and
sugar, add flour, etc. Drop on wafer-paper in small pieces. Bake
lightly.


17. Almond Rings.

  2½-oz. castor sugar.
  White of 1 egg.
  2½-oz. ground almonds.
  Juice of 1 lemon.
  1½-oz. sweet almonds (cut in thin strips).

Beat the sugar and white of egg 10 minutes and add the other
ingredients, mix well and form into small rings and bake a pale brown.


18. Cheese Straws.

  4-oz. grated cheese.
  3 oz. butter.
  4-oz. flour.
  1 yolk of egg.
  Salt.
  Cayenne.

Rub the butter into the flour, add the cheese and seasoning, mix with
the egg into a firm paste; put on a floured board, roll out ⅛ inch
thick and about 5 inches wide, cut in strips, place on a baking sheet,
and cut the remaining paste into strips.


19. Patent Barley Biscuits.

  2 ozs. flour.
  2 ozs. Robinson’s Patent Barley.
  2 ozs. castor sugar.
  2 ozs. butter.
  1 egg.
  Pinch of baking powder.

Cream the butter and sugar, add the yolk of egg, then by degrees the
barley and flour mixed with the baking powder. Roll out thin and cut
with a round cutter. Bake in a moderate oven six minutes.




VII. BONBONS.


1. French Almond Rock.

Put 1-lb. loaf sugar into a pan with 1 teacup of water. Stir till the
sugar is melted, take off the scum, and when it has boiled for ¼ hour,
add 1 tablespoonful vinegar or lemon juice. Stir in sliced or blanched
almonds to taste. Pour on a buttered tin, and cut in slices.


2. Candy Dough.

_Fresh_ icing sugar. Break the white of an egg into one glass, and put
an equal quantity of water into another. Put this into a basin, and
stir it with the sugar until it is of a dough-like consistency. The
proportion of the white of egg and water is two to each pound of sugar.


3. Candy Cherries.

Cut off a piece of candy dough and make it into a thin roll about ½
inch wide. Take a sharp knife and cut into small pieces, and roll them
until they are like marbles. Split some crystalized cherries, and press
a marble between each.


4. Almond Creams.

Blanch the almonds, and cover with candy dough. Roughen the sugar with
a fork.


5. Walnut Creams.

Crack the walnuts and cut in halves, using only the perfect ones,
between which put a candy dough marble and press it. Leave to harden.


6. Cream Dates.

Procure some fresh dates and take out the stones. Put a candy dough
marble in its place, and press together and leave to harden.


7. Brandy Snap.

  ½-lb. treacle.
  10-oz. sugar.
  8-oz. flour.
  2-oz. butter.
  ½-oz. ginger.

Drop in small portions on a greased baking sheet, and when done curl
round a greased rolling pin or stick. Draw off when cold.


8. Raspberry Rock.

To every pound of sugar allow ¾ of a teacup of cold water. Boil the
syrup till it thickens. Drop it in cold water, and it is ready when it
snaps. Flavour with 3 dessertspoonsful of raspberry jam, boiled with a
little water and strained. Pour on buttered plates, and when cool cut
it in pieces.


9. Cocoanut Fondant.

To every pound of boiled candy allow 4-oz. of cocoanut. Stir in well
whilst the sugar is boiling and keep stirring.


10. Chocolate or Coffee Fondant.

Over a clear fire stir together (in enamelled pan) 1-lb. loaf sugar
and a small cup of cold water. When it is melted, mixed, and beginning
to boil, leave alone for 10 minutes. Dip a skewer in, and if a long
silky hair adheres, remove from the fire at once without shaking it,
and leave it till cool. When cool, turn it into a bowl and beat briskly
to a thick cream with a wooden spoon. Knead the paste (like bread)
till it becomes soft and smooth. Flavour with coffee essence or melted
chocolate. Drop on a buttered paper or form into pyramids.


11. Nougat.

Slow fire. Put in a pan ½-lb. sifted sugar dry, no water. When melted,
throw in blanched almonds and a few bitter ones (thoroughly dried and
chopped into rough dice). Stir all together and turn out on a buttered
dish. Work it a little, then roll flat with a greasy rolling pin or
hands. Cut in shapes.


12. Gelées Françaises.

1-oz. gelatine, 1-lb. granulated sugar, nearly 1-pint water,
flavouring. Put the water and gelatine in a pan, and when dissolved add
sugar. Boil fast 25 minutes. Add 1 teaspoonful powdered citric acid, to
give a sharp taste. Pour on three perfectly dry soup plates. Flavour
each differently, and leave till next day. Then with a sharp sugared
knife cut into diamond shapes, toss in castor sugar, and spread on
paper to become crisper. These are much better after a few days.


13. Chestnut Bonbons.

½-lb. chestnuts, 2-oz. chocolate, ¼-gill water, 4-oz. sugar, 1 white
of egg. Boil chestnuts till tender, skin and sieve; add sugar and the
melted chocolate, whip the white stiffly and add it. Bake in little
rocks on wafer-paper.


14. Chocolate Baisers.

  White of 1 egg.
  1 teaspoonful sugar.
  1 teaspoonful powdered chocolate.

Beat the egg to froth and mix with the sugar and chocolate and form
into balls. Place on well-greased tin and bake 20 minutes.


15. Yorkshire Toffee.

  ¼-lb. butter.
  1-lb. Demerara sugar.
  1 tablespoonful treacle.
  1 tablespoonful vinegar.
  1 teacupful water.

Boil all together about 20 minutes and turn out on a buttered dish.


16. Brandy Snap.

  ½-lb. flour.
  ½-lb. treacle.
  ½-lb. sugar.
  ½-lb. butter.

Boil the butter and treacle in a pan. Mix the flour, sugar, and ginger
well together, then mix with the treacle and butter to a stiff cream.
Drop on a baking sheet in small pieces, and when baked roll on a stick
and leave to cool.


17. Marmalade.

Slice very thinly 12 Seville oranges and 2 lemons, carefully removing
all pips. To every pound of pulp allow 3 pints of cold water. Let this
stand for 24 hours, then boil till the chips are very tender and clear.
Let this remain until the following day. To every pint of boiled fruit
allow 1¼-lbs. lump sugar. Boil, stirring constantly until the syrup
jellies and the chips are quite clear. Try the jelly on a saucer from
time to time.


Patent Groats.

Take of Robinson’s Patent Groats one tablespoonful, mix with a
wine-glassful of cold water, gradually added, into a SMOOTH paste, pour
this into a stew-pan containing nearly a pint of boiling water, or
milk, stir the gruel on the fire (while it boils) for ten minutes; pour
it into a basin, add a pinch of salt and a little butter, or if more
agreeable, some sugar, and a small quantity of spirits.

When gruel is made for an Invalid, butter had best be omitted.




VIII. BEVERAGES.


1. Apple Wine.

Slice a large, tart, cooking apple without peeling it, also a little
lemon rind. Put all in a pan with 6 lumps of sugar and 1½-pints of cold
water. Let it come slowly to nearly boiling point; draw it back from
the fire and simmer slowly for a quarter of an hour. Strain into a jug.

Useful during fevers, and as a summer drink.


2. Barley Water for Invalids.

Take of Robinson’s Patent Barley one ounce, mix with a wine-glassful
of cold water into a smooth paste free from lumps, pour this into a
stew-pan containing one quart of boiling water, stir this over the fire
while boiling for five minutes: then flavour with a small bit of lemon
peel or cinnamon, and sweeten according to taste.

When Robinson’s Patent Barley is used to make a Summer beverage, only
half-an-ounce must be taken. It can be greatly improved by aeration
with the aid of “_Sparklets_.”


3. Ginger Beer.

Put into a deep bowl 1-lb. lump sugar, 1½-oz. bruised ginger, 1 lemon,
sliced and the pips taken out, and ½-oz. cream of tartar. Pour 1
gallon of boiling water over. When milk-warm, take a whisk, and beat
in vigorously ¼-pint Brewer’s yeast, or 1-oz. German yeast mixed to
a liquid with powdered sugar. Whisk well, cover with a cloth, let it
stand 15 hours, skim, strain through a piece of old tablecloth (or do
not strain), and bottle, only half filling the bottles.


4. Ginger Wine.

1-oz. Tartaric acid, 5-drms. or 6d. worth (or more) essence of ginger,
2-drms. capsicum, 1-oz. burnt sugar, 2-lbs. lump sugar, 5-qts. boiling
water.

Dissolve the sugar in the boiling water, when nearly cold add the other
things (which should have been mixed together in a jar), and stir often
until cold. Bottle and cork.


5. Lemon Squash.

Juice and rind of 3 lemons, 3-lbs. lump sugar, 1-quart water. Boil till
it forms a clear syrup, and when cold add 2-oz. powdered citric acid.
Strain and bottle.


6. Lemon water.

  6 lemons.
  1-lb. lump sugar.
  1 gallon of boiling water.

Take the pips from the lemons, slice, put in a deep bowl, and pour the
water over. When cold, it is ready for use.




IX. ADDITIONAL USEFUL RECIPES.


1. To bottle Green Gooseberries.

(_Very Good_).

Make the bottles hot and dry in the oven, then fill with picked fruit,
not too full. Pour boiling water over, covering the berries to the top
of the bottle. Cork down as soon as possible, and keep in a cool dry
place. Any other fruit can be done the same way.


2. Gooseberry Jelly.

  ½-stone green gooseberries.
  2-quarts water.

Boil together to pulp, tie in a coarse cloth and let it drip all night,
then add 1-lb. sugar to each pint of juice. Boil gently ¾-hour, and
pour into pots.


3. Apple Jelly.

Rub the apples, and cut them up without paring or coring them. Put in
a pan and fill with water. Boil 1 hour. Put in a bag and strain. Allow
¾-lbs. sugar to 1 pint of juice, and boil 1 hour. Put a little into a
saucer, and if it jellies it is done. Pour into pots.


4. Cough Mixture.

  1d. licorice.
  1d. anise seed.
  1d. peppermint.
  1d. common treacle.
  1d. laudanum.

Mix with 1½-pints of cold water and bottle.


5. Pork Pie Pastry.

To every 1-lb. of flour allow 6-ozs. of lard and 1 dessertspoonful of
salt. Rub the lard into the flour, boil some milk and mix to a stiff
paste. Take some cake tins and take out the bottoms and line with the
warm paste. Three parts fill with minced pork and put a cover about 1
inch thick on the top. Make a hole in the centre and decorate. Place in
a fairly hot oven and bake about 2 hours. Brush with yolk of egg just
before they are cooked.

When the pies are cold, pour into the hole in the top some gelatine,
which has been previously dissolved in boiling water.

If better pastry is required, add more lard, or use butter instead.


6. Recipe for Keeping Eggs.

Take a large stew pot, or deep bowl, and put a layer of common salt in
the bottom. Then insert a few eggs with the thin end downwards, and in
such a way that they do not touch each other. Then put another layer of
salt on the top, and repeat the process until the pot is full, having
salt as the top layer. Tie down very tightly, and whenever an egg is
taken out take care to tie down again. Be sure the eggs are fresh, and
have not been much shaken, and they will keep good for months.




MEMORANDA.




MEMORANDA.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE “IDEAL” COOKERY BOOK
THIRD EDITION ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
